Men are motivated by the images and ideas associated with the cosmetic products (Fiona and Elke, 1998). Kellner (1992) claimed that the different meanings associated with the products are used to boost the fragmented self-image of individuals.

From a personal perspective, men as individuals do not mind aging. However, the process of premature aging associated with lifestyle choices and pollution is a major concern (Temple, 2005). Such concerns drive men to seek cosmetic products that they believe that they slow down the process of aging so that they remain young and attractive for longer.

In a departure from the past when women did the shopping for men when it came to cosmetics, men are increasingly buying their personal care items on their own (Loo-Lee et al., 2005). This is because men have come to appreciate the importance of personal grooming without necessarily being pressured by women (Estelle and Finnegan, 2005).

Men are also more knowledgeable about the various choices available to them (Galloway and Clark, 2003). By shopping on their own, men are able to choose what they feel would best suit them, based on the knowledge they have gathered about the various cosmetic products for men (Clark and Holmes, 2004).

Marketing of cosmetics products has also changed the manner in which men view cosmetic products. This has greatly affected men consumption behavior of cosmetics products. It has been shown that there is a big difference in the manner in which men and women process information related to the consumption of products (Burton, 1995).

It has always been believed that men approach the task of shopping differently from the women (Chiger, 2001). Traditionally, women have been known to be more likely to purchase aesthetic products while the men are more likely to go for functional products (Dittmar et al., 1996).

In analyzing the consumption of cosmetic products, it is clear that it has been traditionally associated with women (Dano et al., 2003). Beauty products are usually considered an important aspect of women’s culture (Coulter et al., 2003). Women readily spent a big part of their income and time on cosmetic products they believe will make them look more attractive.

Men, on the other hand, paid little attention to cosmetics due to past societal attitudes (Inler, 1998).This is the main reason why there are numerous studies on women’s consumption of cosmetic products while the men’s shopping behavior in regards to cosmetics has received little attention (Burton, 1995).

However, there have been a lot of changes in the cosmetic market, and men have become important consumers of cosmetic products as well. Many men are increasingly purchasing different personal care items out of their own volition. Men are becoming more comfortable with doing their own shopping for items like skin care products, toiletries and fragrances (Sturrock and Pioch, 1998).

The men of today have also become part of modern consumerism just like the women (Bocock, 1993). As the men become major players in modern consumerism, they look to create their own identities. They are able to achieve this through dressing style, body image and having the ‘right look’ (Davies and Bell, 1991).

The manufacturers are also sponsoring many studies aimed at learning the consumer behavior of men towards cosmetics (Lambert, 2010). The cosmetic manufacturers have discovered that the male market holds a lot of potential that is largely unexploited.

A lot of resources is now being put into the manufacture and marketing of men’s cosmetic products (Milligan and Neuer, 2009). The major companies now have a whole range of different cosmetic products for men, and they also set aside huge budgets for advertising the same (O’Sullivan and Pearce, 2007).

Social and cultural pressures are some of the main reasons driving this change in the consumer behavior of men. There have been a lot of social and technological changes in the modern and postmodern era, and this is reflected in consumer behavior as well (VanRaaij, 1993).

One of the most outstanding characteristics of the postmodern attitudes towards consumption is that both men and women are involved in equal measure (Sturrock and Pioch, 1998). Social expectation is putting pressure on today’s men to want to look better and remain vibrant (Nickel, 2004). In many societies, it is becoming the norm to be fashionable (McCracken, 2003).

Body image has become very important in today’s society, whose beauty standards have been further reinforced by the mass media (Wolf, 2002). The need to conform to prescribed societal norms concerning attractiveness is as important to men as it is to women since it is seen as a prerequisite for success (Patzer, 2006). The idea of being an attractive individual is seen as the key to success (Peiss, 1998).

The change in culture, beliefs, and norms within the society has also affected the manner in which men perceive cosmetic products. Changing attitudes in social circles are also contributing to men’s consumption of cosmetic products (Cardona, 2000). Caroline (2005) found out that men consume cosmetic products to fit in with their social friends. They do not want to be seen as backward.

The increasing number of women in the workplace is also putting men under pressure to groom themselves (Milligan, 2011). Men feel the need to look good at the workplace. The workplace is one of the areas where men feel intense pressure to take personal grooming seriously. The idea of using cosmetics is also readily acceptable in the office environment than outside (Lou et al., 1998).

Men who are conscious about their image are likely to be perceived as serious businessmen (Caroline, 2005). Men have come to believe that a good image can play a big role in bringing success at the workplace. Men who are serious about their personal grooming are likely to enjoy more success in the business environment (De-Loris, 2001).

The cosmetic industry has moved to capitalize on this change in men’s consumer behavior by undertaking different studies aimed at developing appropriate strategies for meeting the needs of men (Weber, 2002). Recent studies show that younger men (18-34 yrs) do much more shopping in the retail stores than their older counterparts.

The men in the younger age group (16-24 yrs) are now shopping openly for health and beauty products than was the case in the past (Coley and Burgess, 2003). This open embrace of cosmetic products by men is seen by some researchers as evidence of gender-blurring (Kacen, 2000). Young people are usually more open to change and trying new things (Ronald, 2003).

Tremendous changes in the society have led to the emergence of young men who put a lot of value on aesthetics just like women. This phenomena has been referred to as feminization of masculinity (Iida, 2004) and the metro sexual generation (Clarkson, 2005). These metro sexual men are usually found living in big cities, and they place a lot of value on aesthetic appearance.

They are thus willing to put in a lot of efforts and spend a lot of money to boost their self-image and live a certain lifestyle. They have gone past the conventional masculine values and embraced a new, trendy lifestyle that values looks and physical appearance.

They are willing to spend money on fashion, healthy foods, fitness clubs and cosmetic products. Living in the big cities is seen as progressiveness, and everyone there wants to belong and conform (Phelan, Robertson and Sanders, 1997). The big city environment is more open to the idea of cosmetics consumption by men so the men there feel more comfortable buying and using these products (Thomson and Valdermont, 2000).

The various aspects of city life put a lot of emphasis on personal grooming so the men have to ensure that they conform. Celebrities are used to endorse the cosmetic products to offset the negative perceptions towards metro sexual men (Nizar and Miriam, 2009). Celebrities are used to make men feel more comfortable with the idea of using beauty products.

They have helped in changing men’s attitude towards the idea of consuming cosmetic products (Cole, 2008). The celebrities who endorse cosmetic products have good looks and style that are highly regarded by heterosexuals (McCracken, 2003). Most of the celebrities used, like sportsmen and movie stars have masculine roles, and this helps offset the attitudes that cosmetics consumption is a feminine thing.

This presents a potentially huge market for cosmetic manufacturers but there have been relatively few male-specific strategies in the cosmetic industry. The few recognizable strategies, like the media campaigns that target men directly, have played a significant role in increasing men’s consumption of cosmetic products.

Having reviewed a few of the studies done on men’s attitudes and behaviors when it comes to the consumption of cosmetic products, it emerged that there are certain variables that play an important role in all these. These variables can be grouped into three general categories.

The category of personal variables refers to physical appearance, aging concerns, health and fitness and self-image. The sociocultural variables touch on societal perceptions and the new consumer lifestyles.

The third category is for the marketing variables, and the main factors here are advertising and purchase situation. This paper will focus on the marketing variables and how they influence the consumption of men’s cosmetic products.