Contrary to the past where teaching was not priorities as such, teachers in the new world have become assessment reformers where the assessment plan has emphasized on closer substantive connection between classroom assessment and meaningful instruction.

According to Gurney (2007), assessment enhances “processes of peer tutoring, co-operative learning, reciprocal teaching through predicting answers, questioning, clarifying and summarizing and collaborative reasoning” (p.94).

Based on the subjects assigned for the pre-service teacher, teaching social studies had a different assessment compared to the arts subject. Assessment plan generally involved all activities undertaken by the teacher to acquire information about a topic prior to the lesson and after the lesson.

Pre-assessment plan– for ascertaining if students’ achieved prior teachings and if they possessed any idea of the topic intended for discussion, the teacher conducted pre-assessment. The pre-assessment enabled the teacher to discover prior knowledge and allowed the teacher present the new information in appropriate manner.

For the pre-assessment, the teacher will introduce the topic with few verbal questions to bring students into attention and test the level of present knowledge. The pre-assessment plan will also involve providing students with simple quiz pertaining to the topic that the teacher intends to introduce, which is physical features (hills and mountains).

The teacher will also produce all the teaching aids including photographs, magazines and newspapers containing images of hills and mountains for the students to describe and distinguish. The teacher will develop simple drawings of hills and mountains on the whiteboard for the students to identify, as the teacher provides correct answers for the tests.

Formative assessment- Formative assessment simply describes evaluation methods employed by teachers to keep track and check-up of the discussed themes and concepts. To ensure that the teacher achieved both personal and lesson objectives it will be essential to undertake formative assessment.

During the proceedings of the teaching, the teacher will ensure consistent questioning and simple testing to ascertain the level of understanding. After delivering all concepts and discussion of the themes in the subject, the teacher assess students understanding using a matching worksheet, in which each individual student will try to match features with the respective description.

After successful matching in the matching sheet, this does not guarantee total achievement of the concept. To provide a deeper insight into the discussed concepts and themes, the teacher will provide set of ten questions to test the student understanding. Each of the students will respond to the questions individually after which the teacher will collect the answer sheets for marking.

Post- assessment plan- Post-assessment is an appraisal technique used by teachers to ascertain successive understanding and progress in students on the taught topic. Post assessment in this aspect too the summative approach. Summative assessment is a form of assessment criteria used by teachers to obtain information about what students have learnt basing on student, classroom, and school levels.

For this study, a summative assessment will involve successive assessment where every day, during the first three minutes of small-group instruction the teacher assessed the level of understanding in consecutive lessons discussing physical features. Summative assessment will involve evaluating unit tests, performance tasks and portfolio review.

Student undertaking these tests during summative assessment must attain about 75% as their pass mark throughout successive periods of testing. The teacher will provide students several assignments on the discussed physical features to undertake during weekends.

The school will provide continuous assessment tests as in school routines. Subsequently, fall, winter and spring school-wide district assessors will administer assessment.